---
layout: post
title:  "Effective Altruism and me"
date:   2019-12-23 23:01:30 +0200
author:     "Marius Hobbhahn"
category: opinion
---

In this post I want to present my relationship with Effective Altruism (EA). It contains a lengthy introduction to EA to give people who have not yet heard of the concept a chance to understand the rest of the post. I then go on to talk about the benefits I think the movement has compared to other social movements or philosophies. Lastly, I want to clarify some missconceptions about EA that I have witnessed multiple times when talking to others about EA. 

## What is Effective Altruism - an Introduction

There are two paths through which EA originated. The first is one of moral philosophy: Peter Singer initiated the movement with the famous 'drowning child' thought experiment. Assume you are walking home from work and pass a pond. You see a smill child that is about to drown shouting for help. Nobody else is around who could help and the pond is so shallow that there is no risk involved for you. Most people would agree that there is some kind of moral duty to save the child from drowning. Walking away would be neglegence and omission and we would agree that a person just ignoring the child would have done something wrong. Now assume that you are walking home from work in your fancy new suit for 3000 Dollars. Same situation - a child is about to drown in the pond. However, when you save the child your fancy suit is ruined and the 3000 Dollars are essentially gone. Still, most people would say that it is a moral duty to save the child. I mean, who cares about 3000 dollars when a life is at stake, right? it is also important to note that this intuition of the moral duty holds independent of the identity of the child. We would want to save the neighbours child but also a complete stranger. Singer argues that, in reality, we face this exact decision every time we buy something. We know that there are people, for example, in sub-saharan Africa that die every day through preventable diseases who could be saved through a donation to the right organisation. However, we often decide to ignore their suffering and death and rather buy a new luxury good that is neither an investment for the future nor a necessity for a decent life in the west. We buy way more clothes than we need, the latest technological gadgets, a car that is way more expensive than necessary and so on. The large physical and emotional distance and the absence of the direct reward from donating vs. jumping in a pond seems to have such a large effect that we have no problem ignoring this suffering or death for most of the time. Peter Singer argued that this is wrong and many agreed and joined the movement. 
The second path argues through an economic analysis of giving. In 2006, Holden Karnofsky and Elie Hassenfeld decided to donate a large portion of the fortune they earned through hedge fund analysts. Looking at the world through the lense of investment managers they wanted to get a high altruisic return on their donation. Therefore they started to research different organisations but none of them analyzed its own effectiveness or had sufficient data collection methods. So in 2007 they quit their jobs and founded GiveWell which is a website that compares different charities according to their effectiveness. Founded on these two pillars the EA movement grew very fast and by now has many members and affiliated organizations. They ask questions such as: "What is most effective way to aleviate suffering?", "How should we measure happiness?", "What causes should be prioritized?", "Is Artificial Intelligence becoming a risk for sentient life and what can we do about it?", "How can we prevent governments from engaging in large scale conflicts?" and many more. 
TODO: tools such as scale, neglectedness, tractability

## Why do I like the movement/philosophy?

Cause neutral

Ever evolving

no time and space constraints


## Missconceptions and Clarifications

When talking to others about the idea of Effective Altruism I often encounter some missconceptions about the movement. Upon clarification these people either become more open to the idea of EA or have other reasons and concerns with the movement. I also think it is possible not to be convinced by EA, I just do not want people to base that decision on missconceptions of the movement. 

### Please do not strawman EA too much

I witnessed the following scenario multiple times: When introducing someone to EA, they think about it for a minute and then answer something like: "EA does not consider X, therefore the movement is fundamentally flawed and I don't have to think about it anymore. Q.E.D." where X is one of the following questions or any other superficial criticism of EA. Before discarding EA as nonsense after a short time of thinking about it and finding any criticism I would like you to consider the following: Effective Altruism is a global movement with a lot of supporters, many of which are very intelligent people who have thought a long time of their life about EA. Some of them even work fulltime in EA-affiliated institutions like TODO LIST.
This particular criticism, you came up with in 15 minutes, has probably been asked before and either found a satisfying answer or is currently thought about by someone within the movement. This is IMO one of the great advantages of EA. Since it is cause neutral and ever evolving, good criticism will immediatly be incorporated into the debate and solutions are searched for. With this remark I also do not want to stiffle criticism of EA. All I want to say is the following: If you found some criticism against EA think for a second whether this could already have been solved within EA before discregarding the entire philosophy. If you do not find a satisfying answer ask members of the community online or offline. Usually, they are very open for discussion and happy to help. 

### If everyone followed EA, why would the world not collapse?

Usually the first question I get after introducing EA is along the lines of: "If everyone was an EA and we all donated our money to africa, would not the rest of the world be suffering even more because they had no functioning medical system anymore?". I think it is useful to consider EA as a global optimization problem. We want to reduce the suffering of living beings in the universe. A redistribution of wealth at this scale is very likely not the correct solution of that and therefore not something that EA would support. However, the EA community has not yet reached (and will probably for a while not reach) the scale at which we can ask questions about redistribution of this magnitude.

### If I am a convinced EA, do I have to spend 100% of my time for it?

I think this is a depressingly verführerisch (?) thought. I know many EAs who struggle with it on a daily basis. During my Bachelor I was on the brink of burnout due to it and lead to a spiral of negative thoughts and effects. I thought that whenever I was not achieving my goals that would translate to a worse career outcome and hence less reduction of suffering. This made me feel bad and anxious about grades or other achievements in life. Due to these thoughts my grades got worse and I got even more worried. Breaking the spiral cost a lot of effort but fortunately improved my mental health greately. From this time and many discussions with people having similar thoughts I have learned the following lessons: a) really care about your mental health. It is both, bad for you and your ability to help others if you are at the brink of a burnout every day. b) Your time is valuable but investing it probably has some diminishing returns. Working 80 hours a week is not a necessity for becoming a good EA and if it has a negative effect on you, have more time for leasure. c) Don't do something that is incompatible with your preferences even if it has higher altruistic returns. It is very hard to motivate oneself to do something that you really don't like and the price will be payed by your mental health. Additionally, most people excel at what they like and therefore can have more impact with their work. d) 80000 hours has a lot more detailed advice about this and I recommend visiting their website or podcast

TODO links

### Does EA imply utilitarianism?

Not necessarily. Essentially you could plug in any metric and try to find out what actions would most effectively fulfill it over time and space. For example, we could ask what kind of action maximizes the amount of stamps in the universe and act according to that maxim. In practice, however, many people within the EA community believe in some form of Consequentialism, i.e. the value of an action is measured by its consequences. I think this is a result of our desire for measurability on two levels. First, is is easier (objectively still very hard) to approximate the outcome of a certain action than other, non-consequentialist, ideas such as the purity of intentions. Second, it is easier to compare two different actions to each other when considering consequences. We can try to answer questions such as: "where is more suffering alleviated?" or "where do less people die?". For other ethical systems this becomes harder. Questions such as "Which action leads to purer intentions" are often harder to answer because they differ so much from individual to individual and it is easier to deceive ourself about the purity of our intentions when something benefits us. In principal, however, it would be possible to integrate most ethical systems into the EA framework. 
The EA community itself is also really not decided about what particular form of Consequentialism is the correct one. How to measure suffering/happiness correctly or how to weigh suffering compared to happiness are two of the most debated questions within the community. 
I personally am very utilitarian. Other concepts such as fairness, justice or agency matter to me as well but I am not yet sure whether I think they have inherent value or whether they are just a good proxy or heuristic for overall happiness. For example I am not sure whether I care about redistribution of wealth because I think it is 'more fair' or whether I solely care about it because I expect it to lead to better consequentialist outcomes. 

### How can you even measure suffering?

That's the big question. If we could answer it EA would be much easier. I think the first notion we need to get rid of is the idea of 'measurement'. Essentially, all measurements are just approximations of some quantity in the real world. However, our approximations for temperature or radiation are way more accurate than they are for happiness and suffering. While this question itself is an open research, there are some ways that are used, for example, in measuring the effectiveness of a medical intervention. Usually 'disability adjusted life years' (DALYs) or 'quality adjusted life years' (QALYs) are used. 
TODO: rest


### If you help people in poor countries in the present do we not create more suffering in the future?

"If we donate to AMF and their bednets reduce the number of people dying from malaria that means more people who can have children exist. The population of that country grows even faster and future natural disasters like droughts will cause big famines or future conflicts for water and food are more likely." I think this is a valid point and a variable to control for. However, the reasons why people have many children in sub-saharan countries are often diminished by a higher quality of life. a) People have many children because many of them die during their childhood or later in life and can therefore not provide for their families. Having many children is therefore a risk diversifying strategy. Having less diseases and higher life expectancy due to treatments and interventions would therefore reduce the necessity for many children. b) Having less diseases on average leads to longer participation time in school and in the work force lifting people out of poverty and increases their quality of life. Usually a higher quality of life correlates strongly with a decrease in the number of children because of a decreased reliance on them as a safety net. 
TODO find scientific references 

### EA embraces Capitalism, to be truely EA we need to fight for Communism

There are two questions here that need a response: 
First, Does EA embrace Capitalism? Even though EA suggested doing 'Earning to Give' in its early days the movement has shifted away from that position and now recommends doing it only in a small number of cases. This is mostly due to the fact that human resources are more sparse than financial resources on EA related problems. 'Earning to give' was/is IMO the main reason for people having the association between capitalism an EA. Additionally, most EAs that I know are probably in favour of more redistribution from the top to the bottom. Tax exemptions for donations is something that most are in favour of though. 
Second, is Communism a better system? Maybe, I do not know and given both the history of communism and some theoretical considerations I am way too uncertain to focus my entire effort to change the system. Additionally, a group with the size of EA is probably not able to lead to system change on a grand level and should therefore focus and smaller steps.

### Why do you want to kill my grandma?

I don't!! However, in general, I would prefer to save the lives of many individuals in Sub-Sahara Africa instead of prolonging the life of one individual in the West. Usually, I don't have to make that trade-off though, since western countries usually have functioning health care.

### Why do EAs often pretend that they save the world while they have not done anything in their life yet?

Many EAs, especially those who still study, often get accused of not actually doing anything while claiming the moral highground. And to be honest, I think there is a very small amount of people within the movement who is EA for the social credit and to calm their own conscience. However, the vast majority of EAs either do something or position themselves for high impact positions. Many EAs do not eat meat, donate parts of their student money, organize meetups and talks in their local chapters or prothelyze their family and friends. Some just focus on their studies or career to position themselves for later impact. While for some this is counterintuitive because they think being part of a social movement has to have a certain vibe to it, like getting a smile from the kid with cancer you helped or standing in the rain to collect some money for your local school, I think this is not necessary. As an EA IMO one should strive to maximize expected reduction of suffering. If this is done through direct actions like movement building during university that seems a good option. Since talents of different individuals vary strongly, it is likely that someone is more effective in focusing on their research or career to be in a high political or social position later in life. 

## Further reading 

1. Wikipedia
2. 80000hours
3. Stiftung
4. Future of Humanity
5. GiveWell
6. Peter Singer book
7. William McAskill book

***One last note:***

If you have any feedback regarding anything (i.e. layout, code or opinions) I would be happy if you told me in a constructive manner.


