---
layout:     post
title:      "The case for Nudging"
subtitle:   "TODO:funny sentence"
date:       2020-09-15 20:28:00
author:     "Marius Hobbhahn"
header-img: "img/header-imgs/nudging.png"
category:   opinion
---

## **What is this post about?**

Nudging

## Nudging produces good behaviour


## Manipulation ... but nice

We are being manipulated all the time. When we go to the supermarket the expensive stuff is at eye level where it is easiest du see. Candy and sweets are next to the check-out such that we are more likely to give in to our urges while waiting. When we shop online every mouse click is tracked and every interface is optimized to manipulate us into buying something. If you go on facebook or twitter your personal data is analyzed and used to send you more targeted ads to increase their efficacy. No matter which environment you are in, you are manipulated in some way. Most of these kinds of manipulation are very successful and they are used more and in even more ways by private companies. So, I think it's a bit strange that the scientists have understood that humans tend to act irrationally in many ways, private companies have understood it but governments close their eyes and pretend that humans are rational beings that make free and optimal decisions all the time. Given that we are in environments that manipulate us all the time I would rather have a government that listens to the behavioural economists and nudges me in a direction that is in my or societies long-term interested rather than just being a pinball of profit driven companies. This is also the main message I want to get across in this paragraph: When a state decides not to nudge their citizens so that they can make free and rational decisions, these citizens are being manipulated by other players. If you want to maximize your citizens long-term fulfillment of their true preferences you should nudge them to counterbalance these influences and their own short-term biases. 

Even though I can totally understand the uneasy feeling associated with nudging as you essentially consent to be manipulated (which seems paradoxical at first glance) I think it's not as bad. There are lots of decisions where we consent to give away agency to gain some other good. When we sign the terms and conditions of facebook or twitter we consent to being monitored and receive targeted ads because we value the benefits of these platforms higher than their manipulation. Whenever you do sports with others instead of alone because you always lose motivation you essentially give away some agency and use the peer pressure to stay commited to becoming a more healthy person. If you tell everyone that you will now start eating more healthy before you do so you nudged yourself since your friends will call you out and you have more to lose. 

There will most likely always be some force manipulating us in certain ways. I would rather want an actor that is somewhat aligned with my interests or that of society as a whole than one that is not necessarily such as a private company trying to sell me more stuff. Even though it has a weird feeling in the beginning I want the state to level the playing field and nudge me in a positiv direction. 

## What now?

How to nudge
a) state
b) shape environment
c) apps
d) gamification

## Conclusions


#### ***One last note***

If you have any feedback regarding anything (i.e. layout or opinions) please tell me in a constructive manner via your preferred means of communication.

%I want this image
https://medium.com/@BloombergCities/explainer-what-is-a-behavioral-nudge-f32150149deb
https://thenounproject.com/term/prodding/570908/

