---
layout:     post
title:      "I think, I have accidentally become a Neoliberal"
subtitle:   "TODO"
date:       2019-12-21 20:28:00
author:     "Marius Hobbhahn"
header-img: "img/img-headers/TODO"
category:   opinion
---

## **What is this post about?**

When I was in high school I was a big fan of regulation. For my 17 year old self regulation was equivalent to a magic wand with which politicians could make problems disappear but for some reason these politicians just were too dumb to wave the magic wand. If companies polluted the environment in some way, the 17 year old genius I was would have regulated the shit out of them. If companies underpaid their staff in the gig economy I would have just forced them to pay more. If there was a problem, I would have waved my magic regulation wand and solved it. While this is a bit exaggerated, it still captures the essence of my thinking back then. The reason for why I thought this way, I presume, wasn't that I truely the world would be so easy but rather related to signalling. When I have no responsibility at all and I run around telling my classmates that politicians are idiots and I could have solved their problems easily I signal that I'm smart because I know so much more than our elected representatives. Maybe I was signalling even more to myself rather than to others. Pretending the world is simple and problems aren't hard at all is such an easy way to feel smart when you don't have responsibilities. Since then I have shifted my economic positions quite drastically. I have listened to many podcasts about different parts of economics ranging from Macro-economics over game theory to start-ups and debated for and against many many different economic ideas within competetive debating. Most of my basic assumptions have turned out to be too simple or wrong over time and I have gradually changed and refined my position over time. The two largest shifts in beliefs I have observed are

1. I now believe that markets usually work quite well. Supply and demand and competition between companies usually lead to the lowest prices for the consumer, more innovation and better products. However, the outcome that this market produces might not necessarily align with the best long-term interests of society. A market might, for example, be really efficient in extracting oil and selling it at the lowest possible price even though this leads to more air pollution and climate change. This doesn't mean that the market is wrong or disfunctional, it just means the goals have to be re-aligned with that of society. 

2. The economy is really complex. Regulating one bit has ripple effects and unforeseen consequences and is definitly not a magic wand you can just use to solve problems. Regulating the gig economy too drastically can mean that many people will lose their job and are way worse off than they were before. Harsh climate regulations in one country can mean that companies relocate to others with even laxer regulation and thereby increase the net amount of CO2 emissions. 

TODO: add-on about how markets find their way. 

By now I have so many specific views on markets, regulation, housing, game theory, climate change, etc. that I didn't feel at all like I belonged to either of the classic left vs. right camp in econ. I believe that markets are a good idea when the incentives align with those of society and but I also want more redistribution. I want drugs to be legal but I think they should be heavily regulated, e.g. advertising should be banned. Just to name a few. Given that I didn't belong to either of the classic camps I thought my economic positions were just a pretty long list of specific policies that I like and dislike without overarching concept. However, when I started using Twitter more regularly, I saw that people often used the term "Neoliberal" to describe my economic positions - so, maybe I'm a Neoliberal. 

So in the following you can find an incomplete list of my most important economic beliefs. The purpose of this post is partly educational for readers and for me. Actually putting your opinions to text is a first step to testing if they make sense and publishing them means improves accountability. If you like the post and know other people who you expect to like it, please share it with them. If you didn't like it or disagree please contact me and tell me why. 

### Clarification - What do I mean by Neoliberalism?

Many economic concepts are so loaded that they become completely meaningless. If you say you are economically conservative than that can either mean you are pro free trade or pro isolationism. If you say you think Communism could work you can either mean Norway is nice or you support the UDSSR under Stalin. Most of these words are just labels and tribal identities which are used to villify each other in public discourse without talking about content. I don't like that at all so I will try to avoid labels as much as possible and try to talk content. Thus I will quickly define how I understand Neoliberalism and then move to actual substance. 

The <a href='https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoliberalism'>Wikipedia article on Neoliberalism</a> really does NOT capture very well what I think Neoliberalism is about. To me it reads like a definition of Libertarianism, i.e. markets solve everything, deregulation and small government. While a pro-market stance seems to be an essential part of Neoliberalism it misses an important component. This part is captured better in the definition that Sam Bowman provides on the <a href='https://neoliberalproject.org/neoliberal-podcast'>Neoliberal Podcast</a> episode "I'm a Neoliberal, and maybe you are too ft. Sam Bowman" where they define Neoliberalism as "Neoliberal = Markets + Redistribution". To extrapolate a bit from this definition I would say that Neoliberalism claims that markets are a good tool to achieve a goal but states have to make sure that this goal also aligns with the values of society and therefore shape the incentives that companies have. 

My biggest disagreement with Neoliberalism is probably about the right size of government. While Neoliberalism is rather on the side of small government, I'm more of a medium government guy. I like institutions that control and enforce that I have clean water, that make sure that my food is save and that my medication is tested substantially. On the other hand the FDAs handling of the approval process for the Covid vaccine took way too long. Somewhere in between a lot of regulation and nearly no regulation I expect to be a sweet spot and my estimate is probably further away from nearly no regulation than that of the average Neoliberal. 

Whether these beliefs warrant the label Neoliberal or not I don't know. But honestly, I also don't really care too much about the label. 

### Framing

It's not markets vs. governments. It's working vs. non-working institutions. Which works better, or which is less bad (to base our expectations). Review conditions for markets to work and why I shifted my positons on certain issues. It's all about incentives. 


### Conditions for markets to work

I undervalued the effectiveness of markets and the many possibilities it can be used to solve problems. Frankly, in many cases, I also didn't understand markets sufficiently and therefore didn't trust them. A lengthy explanation deserves its own post which I will make at some point in the future. However, the short version is this: There are some conditions that should be met for markets to work. If they are met, I think markets are likely the most accurate tool to make predictions, price things, or calibrate beliefs about the world. The conditions are
1. **Incentives:** They are the most obvious - if people can't make any money they probably won't bother engaging in the market.
2. **No natural monopolies and access to many people:** Natural monopolies can occur in situations where you either have very high entry cost, i.e. you need to invest hundreds of millions of dollars to build a railway network, or where the good that is being sold relies on a distribution network that exists only once. For example, when one company owns the railway network, the water pipes, or the telecommunication network of a country it does not make sense for a competitor to build a second network next to it. Therefore, you have no competition and the service will decline while the prices rise. I think this can be seen by how bad the results of the privatization of water have been for most countries. Additionally, there should be access to many people since the more people participate in a market, the more accurate is the price, prediction, etc.
3. **No infrastructure:** I think infrastructure should be built and maintained by states most of the time. This is for the simple reason that the costs of infrastructure are local but the benefits are global. Building a new and larger road, for example, is a money drain most of the time. You need to service it properly, fix all the holes, etc. The benefits of the road, however, mostly come from the access that companies now have to faster transportation of goods and people, etc. This means that the profits of infrastructure are very indirect, namely the increasing economic value and the taxes that are generated by it. A single company has to make a profit directly from operating the road. This means they either have to take charges, which decreases the number of people using it and thereby its functionality or they don't build the road in the first place because it is not profitable. A government, on the other hand, can take a loss for the road every single year and still make up for it due to the increase in tax revenue.
4. **Limited possibility to change the outcome:** I think betting markets are generally a good tool to get accurate predictions about future events. A betting market for weather, for example, might yield more accurate predictions than choosing your favourite weather station. However, these ideas only work if the outcome cannot be tampered with. An interesting idea, for example, would be to have betting markets on the likelihood of re-offence for prisoners. There are lots of biases in the judicial system and a market could overcome those. However, someone who has bet a lot on a person re-offending might try to actively increase the probability for this event by attacking the person or mentally bullying them. The wheather on the other hand is harder to fuck around with.

In conclusion, I think that there are some parts of society that markets are ill-suited to solve problems, e.g. water, infrastructure, public transport and some parts of health care. However, markets can be used in more ways than they currently are in other parts of society, especially when it comes to predicting future events or CO2 reduction schemes like emissions trading.

TODO: elaborate on markets, superforcasting and so on. 


### Regulation

Not sure if it actually makes sense to talk about whether a lot or not a lot regulation is good or bad. depends on the actual case. 

YIMBIS & housing

people who vote & people who can't vote (e.g. those who want to live in CA but aren't there yet)

incentives of politicians

proactive vs reactive

Ultimately good when done right: clean water, healthy food, medication, etc.

Signalling rather than outcome oriented

### Guidance and Regulation not Banning

Legalize it, regulate it, nudge it. 

Drugs, Cigarettes, Alcohol, Porn, Sex work

Proactive not reactive

### Redistribution

Sweden did it correctly. Low business tax, high individual tax. 

### Climate Change 

Certificates

### Monopolies work less often than I thought

There are lots of situations in which people fear a monopoly within a certain market and some companies business model rely entirely on achieving a monopoly. My best explanation for Ubers business model, for example, is a three-step process: a) Achieve market dominance (i.e. a monopoly) b) build self-driving cars c) raise prices and profit. Netflix also seems to prioritize market dominance over short-term profitability and many other platform driven companies try to do the same. Most of them burn a lot of money now in the hopes of achieving a monopoly and becoming a cashcow in the future. However, I'm not so sure whether these strategies pay off. You can only milk your cashcow if people keep using your platform and decide against changing the product and I think some of these companies overestimate the cost of changing for most individuals. Just because I am used to using the Uber-app does not mean I am not willing to download Lyft as soon as Uber raises their prices. Similarly, if Netflix is too expensive I don't see any reason not to just switch to Amazon, Disney or other online-streaming platforms. Clearly, there are examples where the cost of switching is higher because some of the products you have interact well with each other, i.e. having an Apple IPhone and Mac or when all of your friends use a certain social network like facebook it is unreasonable for you, as an individual, to switch. But even in these domains there were very strong market shifts in the past. Remember Blackberry and MySpace? They had nearly complete market dominance and go completely crushed by the competition after some bad management decisions. An even stronger example is inter-city transport in Germany. Some people always feared that the "Deutsche Bahn" a partly private and partly public train company had a monopoly on inter-city transport and therefore could make too much money from their train connections. However, a bus company, Flixbus, provided way cheaper means of transportation between cities and thereby provided good competition for Deutsche Bahn. Interestingly, the strategy of Flixbus was/is to get a monopoly on European road transportation and drive their competition out of business. However, the switching cost for downloading a different app and using a bus that has is painted in a different color and run by a different company don't seem very high. I therefore expect that the competition within this business will still be possible even if Flixbus has market dominance. I guess my best conclusion from these observations is that people are likely to switch even if there are some cost attached to it as long as the difference in quality is felt through higher prices or worse quality. The domains in which you have monopolies that are very hard to break are those outlined above: Water, sanitation and infrastructure. The switching cost are not only high but usually there just is no competition because it doesn't make sense to build a water pipe next to an already existing pipe. One thing that I find quite funny is that most of the efforts to achieve market dominance and milk a monopoly cashcow actually lead to effects that are opposite to what the investors desire. They burn lots of money and hope that they can then reap the benefits later. If the monopoly is never achieved, they essentially redistributed their money to the masses by providing undervalued services. In the end they are the cashcow that we were milking all along. 

### Should CEOs salary be capped?


### Some things I am unsure about

Health care private or public and to which extend?

## Conclusion



#### ***One last note***

If you have any feedback regarding anything (i.e. layout or opinions) please tell me in a constructive manner via your preferred means of communication.


