---
layout:     post
title:      "Reflections on my first year as a PhD"
subtitle:   ""
date:       2021-03-01 20:28:00
author:     "Marius Hobbhahn"
header-img: "img/img-headers/TODO"
category:   opinion
tags:       [Miscellanious]
---

## **What is this post about?**

About a year ago I started my PhD in Machine Learning with Philipp Hennig. Over this year, I have changed my mind quite a lot on different issues regarding PhDs. 

The purpose of this post is to help other people, e.g. if someone is unsure whether to pursue a PhD, and to expose my own approach to feedback from others. So if you think, for example, I could do something better, please reach out and let me know. I also want to make clear, that I haven't mastered all of the following suggestions and you should think of them more as "things I try to improve and implemented to different degrees". 

### Mini-overview

When I started my Master in Tübingen, there were lectures by a new professor, Philipp Hennig. After the very first lecture I felt that the way he thought and taught were on another level compared to most of my other lectures. I began to enroll in every lecture and seminar and ultimately did my Master's thesis with him. Afterwards, I started a Phd under his supervision.

Content-wise, I'm working on probabilistic Machine Learning - more specifically on how to make Bayesian Machine Learning faster. So far, I have written two papers, both of which have not yet been published. The first paper is an extended version of my Master's thesis and it has been rejected multiple times already (more on that later).
 
My second paper deals with the core idea of the PhD - finding faster approximations for Bayesian Machine Learning. It is submitted to JMLR but am still waiting for the first round of reviews. 

I have to admit that I really enjoy the process of creating and writing the paper but don't enjoy the revision process. 

TODO:links

### Caveats

This post is more critical than I anticipated. Thus, I want to make two things very clear.
1. **I started my PhD during the covid-pandemic.** I have never been on an in-person conference and found the online versions a bit unsuited for me. Thus, I don't really know anyone outside of my own group who works on similar questions. Maybe without the pandemic, some of the following problems would have been easier to solve.
2. **I think Philipp and the MoML group are great.** I'm very happy to have Philipp as a supervisor even if it sometimes feels as if his brain is running on the latest GPU while mine uses an old CPU. The people in the group are really nice and smart. I couldn't have wished for more. 

### A PhD is harder than I expected

When I started my Ph.D. I expected research to be hard but it turned out to be even harder. An analogy might capture this discrepancy best. The Bachelor's program is like a highway - everything is already established, there are lots of resources online and one can generally move fast. The Master's is more like a country road - content gets harder, you can still find stuff online but the speed is still decent. I expected the Ph.D. to be like riding a bike on a cobbled road but now it feels more like slashing through the jungle with a machete. I'm not sure whether this is due to the nature of my project, the situation with covid, that I'm just not suited for a Ph.D. or just a general feature of research but I found that other people tend to share my perspective.

TODO consequence

TODO figure of things you learn vs. things you know you don't know.

### Supervisor-Student Relationship

When I started my PhD, my perception of the supervisor-student relationship was basically: "The professor knows a lot and is very smart. I know nearly nothing and am less smart. Thus, I mostly listen to what the professor says and develop their ideas." In retrospect, however, that is suboptimal. Firstly, I often didn't understand exactly what Philipp meant during a meeting and wasted a lot of time second-guessing his true intentions afterwards. It sometimes felt like he had already mapped out the entire project in his head and I was just unable to follow the map. Secondly, due to the large perceived skill and intelligence difference, I sometimes didn't ask dumb questions or rephrased them in weird ways to make them sound less dumb. Most of the time, the rephrasing just made it much more confusing. As a consequence, I wasted some of mine and Philipps time, but more importantly, I felt bad more often than I should have. 

Now, my recommendations would be
1. **Own your project:** Your advisor is just that - an advisor. They are not a dictator but should rather help you with __your__ PhD project. They might have picked that project for you and are more knowledgeable about it in the beginning but it is still important that you develop a sense of ownership and responsibility for it. 
2. **Ask dumb questions:** Don't forget that the reason why you work with an advisor is because they know more than you. It would be weird if you didn't have a lot of questions that might be simple for them to answer. This doesn't imply that you should ask all questions that ever come to mind but if you are unable to find an answer on your own you should ask for their help. TODO: BSC - the askers are faster. 

Philipp always likes to say that .. beginning he is expert then we ...

### Workload management

TODO: harvest the productive hours.
Work smart not hard.

### Supervisor meetings

Your advisor is usually pretty busy. They have many different students, they teach, they have to do admin stuff, write grant proposals and so on. Thus, they have a lot on their mind. I, on the other hand, was able to focus much of my time on my project and entered every meeting ready to pick up exactly where we left off last time. During the meetings, we then sometimes did a derivation we had already done or discussed and then discarded a potential strategy for the same reasons we had discarded it a month prior simply because Philipp had been in hundreds of meetings while I had been in four since then. 

Now, I would recommend to
1. **Really prepare meetings:** I would argue that Philipps answers to my questions, strategic insight and pointers to resources probably save me at least 20 hours per 1-hour meeting. Thus, it is completely reasonable to really prepare a meeting, e.g. by making slides with a summary of the last meeting, plots and research questions. The less often you meet, the better your preparation should be. 
2. **Gently take control:** Your advisor usually has __a lot__ of ideas. Some of them might be brilliant, some of them might be valueable for future projects but not now and some of them were already suggested and discarded in the previous meeting. So the less structure you give the meeting, the more explorative it will be. Sometimes this is nice, but more often than not, I just want to know the answer to a very specific question. Therefore, I found it helpful to state clear goals in the beginning and try to get back on track when I feel like our conversation has shifted too far away. 

### Choosing a project

HITs-based academia
Pick projects that you really care about -> say no to a lot of projects
kill your darlings -> look for things that could end the project

### Writing a paper

I don't think I'm very good at paper writing but I think I have become less terrible at it. Thus, the following suggestions are probably targeted more towards beginners than experts. 

1. Whatever you write has to be **true, understandable and concise in that order**. Science is useless if the content of a paper is not true. TODO
2. **Iterate yourself**
3. **Make it shorter**
4. **get feedback early on (and give a lot of feedback)**
5. **make beautiful figures**

### Academia is even more broken than I expected

The review process is usually very similar: Two reviewers like the paper and would accept it with or without minor revisions. The two others sometimes have good suggestions and sometimes misunderstood something. Then we write a rebuttal which sometimes changes the opinions of the critical voices. Finally, the paper is rejected by the AC, sometimes for reasons that didn't come up during the reviews, sometimes for reasons that came up. Overall, I would say that 50% of the reviewers gave good feedback that improved the paper. Overall, I found this experience very frustrating - partly because of the rejections but mostly due to the feeling that the review system in ML is broken. More on that later. 

### The steady turtle wins the race

Don't take yourself too seriously

Steady turtle wins the race. I don't like deadline stress and I think it's counterproductive. 

### Get a research partner



#### ***One last note***

If you want to get informed about new posts you can <a href='http://www.mariushobbhahn.com/subscribe/'>subscribe to my mailing list</a> or <a href='https://twitter.com/MariusHobbhahn'>follow me on Twitter</a>.

If you have any feedback regarding anything (i.e. layout or opinions) please tell me in a constructive manner via your preferred means of communication.


