---
layout:     post
title:      "I might have accidentally become a Neoliberal"
subtitle:   "TODO"
date:       2021-03-01 20:28:00
author:     "Marius Hobbhahn"
header-img: "img/img-headers/TODO"
category:   opinion
---

## **What is this post about?**

When I was in high school I was a big fan of regulation. For my 17 year old self regulation was equivalent to a magic wand with which politicians could make problems disappear but for some reason these politicians just were too dumb to wave the magic wand. If companies polluted the environment in some way, the 17 year old genius I was would have regulated the shit out of them. If companies underpaid their staff in the gig economy I would have just forced them to pay more. If there was a problem, I would have waved my magic regulation wand and solved it. While this is a bit exaggerated, it still captures the essence of my thinking back then. The reason for why I thought this way, I presume, wasn't that I truely believed the world would be so easy but rather related to signalling. When I have no responsibility at all and I run around telling my classmates that politicians are idiots and I could have solved their problems easily, I signal that I'm smart because I know so much more than our elected representatives. Maybe I was even signalling more to myself rather than to others. Pretending the world is simple and problems aren't hard at all is such an easy way to feel smart when you don't have responsibilities. Since then I have shifted my economic positions quite drastically. I have listened to many podcasts and read books about different parts of economics ranging from Macro-economics over game theory to start-ups and debated for and against many many different economic ideas within competetive debating. Most of my basic assumptions have turned out to be too simple or wrong over time and I have gradually changed and refined my position over time. The two largest shifts in beliefs I have observed are

1. I now believe that markets usually work quite well. Supply and demand and competition between companies usually lead to the lowest prices for the consumer, more innovation and better products. However, the outcome that this market produces might not necessarily align with the best long-term interests of society. A market might, for example, be really efficient in extracting oil and selling it at the lowest possible price even though this leads to more air pollution and climate change. This doesn't mean that the market is wrong or disfunctional, it just means the goals have to be re-aligned with that of society. This also means that markets usually "find their way", i.e. if there is a real demand for something and you regulate the supply there will be a blackmarket or some shady alternative to provide the demanded good. 

2. The economy is really complex. Regulating one bit has ripple effects and unforeseen consequences and is definitly not a magic wand you can just use to solve problems. Regulating the gig economy too drastically can mean that many people will lose their job and are way worse off than they were before. Harsh climate regulations in one country can mean that companies relocate to others with even laxer regulation and thereby increase the net amount of CO2 emissions. This doesn't mean that I hate regulation. It just means one has to very carefully check which kind of unintened consequences a piece of legislation could have. 

By now I have so many specific views on markets, regulation, housing, game theory, climate change, etc. that I didn't feel at all like I belonged to either of the classic left vs. right camp in econ. For example, I believe that markets are a good idea when the incentives align with those of society but I also want more redistribution. I think drugs should be legal but I think they should be heavily regulated, e.g. advertising should be banned. I think companies are polluting far too much but my approach to solve it would mainly involve <a href='https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emissions_trading'>Emissions trading</a>. Given that I didn't belong to either of the classic camps I thought my economic positions were just a pretty long list of specific policies that I like and dislike without overarching concept. However, when I started using Twitter more regularly, I saw that people often used the term "Neoliberal" to describe my economic positions. When I listen to the <a href='https://neoliberalproject.org/neoliberal-podcast'>Neoliberal Podcast</a> I find myself agreeing most of the time. So, maybe I'm a Neoliberal?!

So in the following you can find an incomplete list of my most important economic beliefs. The purpose of this post is partly educational for readers and for me. Actually putting your opinions to text is a first step to testing if they make sense and publishing them means improves accountability. If you like the post and know other people who you expect to like it, please share it with them. If you didn't like it or disagree please contact me and tell me why. 

TODO: the post is a bit random sometimes?!

### Clarification - What do I mean by Neoliberalism?

Many economic concepts are so loaded that they become completely meaningless. If you say you are economically conservative then that can either mean you are pro free trade or pro isolationism. If you say you think Communism could work you can either mean Norway is nice or you support the UDSSR under Stalin. Most of these words are just labels and tribal identities which are used to villify each other in public discourse without talking about content. I don't like that at all so I will try to avoid labels as much as possible and try to talk content. Thus I will quickly define how I understand Neoliberalism and then move to actual substance. 

The <a href='https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoliberalism'>Wikipedia article on Neoliberalism</a> really does NOT capture very well what I think Neoliberalism is about. To me the Wikipedia article reads like a definition of Libertarianism, i.e. markets solve everything, deregulation and small government. While a pro-market stance seems to be an essential part of Neoliberalism it misses an important component. This part is captured better in the definition that Sam Bowman provides on the <a href='https://neoliberalproject.org/neoliberal-podcast'>Neoliberal Podcast</a> episode "I'm a Neoliberal, and maybe you are too ft. Sam Bowman" where they define Neoliberalism as "Neoliberal = Markets + Redistribution". A more elaborate definition can be found in the blog post <a href='https://exponents.substack.com/p/what-neoliberals-believe'>What Neoliberals Believe</a>. To extrapolate a bit from this definition I would say that Neoliberalism claims that markets are a good tool to achieve a goal but states have to make sure that this goal also aligns with the values of society and therefore shape the incentives that companies have. I also found that the people who identify as neoliberal often call themselfs "radical pragmatics", i.e. they have a strong desire to think about the consequences of a piece of legislation independent of its ideological connotation - which I find very appealing. When, for example, the laws that were supposed to protect a group of people, e.g. laws banning employers from identifying whether their potential employee was an ex-convict, turned out to be very bad for people who are stereotypically associated with crime, e.g. young black men, the Neoliberal position would be to remove these bans and come up with a better solution. In contrast, people towards the left end of the economic spectrum did not want to repeal the ban even though the research showed it was an ineffective tool. So a slightly different definition of Neoliberalism would be "do whatever yields the desired consequences" which I can also identify with. 

My biggest disagreement with Neoliberalism is probably about the right size of government. While Neoliberalism is rather on the side of small government, I'm more of a medium government guy. I like institutions that control and enforce that I have clean water, that make sure that my food is save and that my medication is tested substantially and I don't think that markets can solve all of this on their own. On the other hand the FDAs handling of the approval process for the Covid vaccine took way too long and the distribution rollout was a disaster in most countries. Somewhere in between a lot of regulation and nearly no regulation I expect to be a sweet spot and my estimate is probably further away from nearly no regulation than that of the average Neoliberal. 

Whether these beliefs warrant the label Neoliberal or not I don't know. But honestly, I also don't really care too much about the label. 

### Framing

I think one of the biggest baits within economic discussions is the markets vs. government dichotomy. It's like asking whether German or French people are better, because the answer clearly is that it depends on the person. You will find nice people in France and in Germany and you will find idiots in France and in Germany and it doesn't really make sense to compare averages because they won't help you answer a practical question. If you are a young progressive cosmopolitan, Paris will serve you well and rural Germany won't. Similarly, there are conditions in which governments are better suited than markets and the other way around. The important question is which conditions these are.

And I think that these conditions are very tightly related to the incentives governments and companies have. Optimally, companies have a financial profit incentive by providing a service that many people are willing to pay more money for than it costs to produce the goods. However, sometimes parts of the cost are externalized to the general public or to future generations, e.g. in the case of pollution. Governments incentives structures are more complex and they are definitly more complicated than just saying "the governments incentive is always and only to maximize the public good". Governments are pretty large bodies made up of individuals that all have their own goals, e.g. promotion to a better position or winning a re-election campaign. Furthermore, the different subunits of goverments often have incentives that are very different from an optimal help of the public good. Health ministeries are often much more concerned with deflecting responsibilities so that they are untargetable for lawsuits than having an optimal situation for the hospitals, doctors and patients they are supposed to serve. 

Clearly, these are all situations in which the individual incentives of institutions, be those companies or governments, do not align with the public interest. Thus I think the markets vs. governments dichotomy is pretty flawed and the correct comparison is institutions whose incentives align with the public good vs. institutions that don't. Thus, I think it is instructive to further investigate different conditions and situations in which different institutions work or fail - which will be the content of the rest of this article. 

### Conditions for markets to work

1. **Incentives:** They are the most obvious - if people can't make any money they probably won't bother engaging in the market.
2. **Inability to externalize the costs:** TODO
3. **Perverse Incentives:** TODO private prisons; regulating yourself, e.g. water. 
4. **No natural monopolies and access to many people:** Natural monopolies can occur in situations where you either have very high entry cost, i.e. you need to invest hundreds of millions of dollars to build a railway network, or where the good that is being sold relies on a distribution network that exists only once. For example, when one company owns the railway network, the water pipes, or the telecommunication network of a country it does not make sense for a competitor to build a second network next to it. Therefore, you have no competition and the service will decline while the prices rise. I think this can be seen by how bad the results of the privatization of water have been for most countries. Additionally, there should be access to many people since the more people participate in a market, the more accurate is the price, prediction, etc.
5. **No infrastructure:** I think infrastructure should be built and maintained by states most of the time. This is for the simple reason that the costs of infrastructure are local but the benefits are global. Building a new and larger road, for example, is a money drain most of the time. You need to service it properly, fix all the holes, etc. The benefits of the road, however, mostly come from the access that companies now have to faster transportation of goods and people, etc. This means that the profits of infrastructure are very indirect, namely the increasing economic value and the taxes that are generated by it. A single company has to make a profit directly from operating the road. This means they either have to take charges, which decreases the number of people using it and thereby its functionality or they don't build the road in the first place because it is not profitable. A government, on the other hand, can take a loss for the road every single year and still make up for it due to the increase in tax revenue.
6. **Limited possibility to change the outcome:** I think betting markets are generally a good tool to get accurate predictions about future events. A betting market for weather, for example, might yield more accurate predictions than choosing your favourite weather station. However, these ideas only work if the outcome cannot be tampered with. An interesting idea, for example, would be to have betting markets on the likelihood of re-offence for prisoners. There are lots of biases in the judicial system and a market could overcome those. However, someone who has bet a lot on a person re-offending might try to actively increase the probability for this event by attacking the person or mentally bullying them. The wheather on the other hand is harder to fuck around with.

TODO: Not always easy to predict. See railway and busses. 

### The default should be markets 

When the above conditions are fulfilled the default should be to let markets rule. 

Competition rules

In conclusion, I think that there are some parts of society that markets are ill-suited to solve problems, e.g. water, infrastructure, public transport and some parts of health care. However, markets can be used in more ways than they currently are in other parts of society, especially when it comes to predicting future events or CO2 reduction schemes like emissions trading.

TODO: elaborate on markets, superforcasting and so on. 

### Regulation

Similar to how I don't think markets are always correct or governments are always correct, I don't think regulation is either always bad, like maybe the GOP would suggest, or always good, like a very leftist position would suggest. To understand when and why regulation makes sense, I want to look at a prominent failure mode - housing. 

In the context of housing a prominent group of advocates are referred to as NIMBYs (Not In My BackYard). Their general stance could be described as "people should have housing but new houses shouldn't be built in my neighborhood". They can have this stance because of reasons connected to the newcomers, e.g. that their community could be flooded with "bad people", because of aesthetic reasons, e.g. that they don't want to protect old buildings or dislike skyscrapers, or they could have it because of financial reasons, e.g. they own property in an area and its value would fall if new buildings were built. 

TODO connection

Within the housing market there are multiple ways in which incentives are not aligned.
1. The people who use political capital are distproporionatly NIMBYs. They are often older people who are worried about the integrity of their neighbourhood or people who already own a home and are worried it falls in value. Additionally, they are often the only ones willing to show up at townhalls or write angry letters to the local politician because they have the time to do so or they are sufficiently emotionally invested. This leads to a situation where local politicians are incentiviced to cater to NIMBYs because they win votes if they do and gain nothing if they don't. 
2. The people who are most in need of more housing often wield no political power. They are the ones who want to live in San Francisco but because it is too expensive they can't move there and vote in local elections. Thus, by definition, the game is rigged towards people who often have an incentive to defend the status quo and the people who want change have no say at all. 
people who vote & people who can't vote (e.g. those who want to live in SF but aren't there yet).
3. Fixing housing is often a long-term project where the benefits are gained in years but the harms come immediatly. So let's say the mayor of SF decided to give permission for new houses in some neighbourhood. Then it would take some time to do the bidding to find a company, prepare the ground, deal with some lawsuits from the local population and ultimatly build a house. So if the house is finally finished after 5 years you might not be in office anymore and you won't profit politically from it. However, the lawsuits and the angry NIMBY population will directly oppose you once you grant the building permits. They will campaign against you rerunning for office and come to your office and townhalls to express their anger. Thus the way of least resistance is to just not build. Similarly people in the drug administration or health care officials in general are often punished for medicaments that cause harm but even though they were released but not rewarded for the harm that could have been prevented by releasing a medication earlier (can recommend <a href='https://open.spotify.com/episode/2ahS9g2sb3aO1ZIgDfaK1e'>the clearer thinking podcast episode with Rob Wiblin</a> on this issue). 

The results of these and other reasons is a housing crisis in the entire Bay area where people have to move in their car or out of the Bay Area entirely even though just building houses with 10 floors and stop wasting so much space on single family housing would probably already solve more of it. 

There are multiple other reasons why regulation can be unaligned or suboptimal.
1. Often regulation is done in a very reactive way, i.e. people see a problem and think of a quick-fix solution to the problem instead of asking what the underlying reason for the problem is or whether it has unintended side effects. Only allowing cars with certain number plates on even days to drive into the city and others on odd days sounds like a good way to half the number of cars on a given day. What actually happened though was that many people got a second car with the corresponding number plate because it didn't solve the underlying problem that people need to get into town. 
2. Sometimes regulation is much more about sending a signal than achieving a certain outcome. Banning plastic straws is a prime example for "doing something for the environment" without actually doing anything. The effect is so marginal that the benefits are basically negligible. However, people forget that there are real cost to some individuals who are unable disabled and thus can't drink without a straw. And sure, you can replace them with non-plastic alternatives and whatnot but its one of these situations where I can't stop asking myself "Why are we focusing our energy on this dumb issue at all? Can't we go think about solutions to more important problems?". 
3. Often there is tons of regulation debt. TODO: so many Scheine etc.

There is an unlimited supply of examples or analysis on regulation done badly which I will not further elaborate. But don't get me wrong here - ultimately, I think regulation is good when implemented correctly. Being able to have standards for water, securing health regulations in food and medication are good causes and areas where I would want regulation to exist. The question therefore is how to design regulation that prevents these failures. While I clearly can't give any definit answer to that, here are some thoughts that helped my thinking about the issue.

1. **Design systems, don't plug holes:** With this umbrella term I mean different things. a) First one should determin the underlying causes for a given problem as best as possible. b) Then think about a system that improves the causes not the fix the symptoms. c) Making sure that the incentives of the individual actors within the system align with the overall goal of the system, e.g. health care officials might be rewarded for the lives safed not only punished for harm prevented. Obviously this, once again, requires careful thinking about unintended consequenes. 
2. **Trade-offs:** There are some forms of regulation that are no-brainers, e.g. if a company uses poisonous food to increase their profit you ban the use of that ingredient. However, I would pose that most kinds of regulation are actually much more complicated and actually have meaningful trade-offs. Thus I think regulation should be thought about in terms of these trade-offs. Suddenly it's not a question of "Do we have long testing procedures for medication to prevent harm?" but "Do we have long testing procedures for medication to prevent harm _at the cost_ of potential benefits from earler deployment?". Just asking it like this doesn't mean you automatically have to favor deregulation it just means you are aware of the trade-off you are facing and could potentially design a system that would optimize for both sides of the trade-off instead of just one, e.g. the more severe your condition the earlier you can get the medicine even if it isn't yet fully tested. 
3. **Be willing to update a lot:** Most systems are complicated and even if you think a lot about a problem there is always a high probability of missjudging something. Thus it is important to be willing to update legislation if it turns out not to work or if times change. This sometimes involves pretty drastic changes and you should be willing to take them. If, for example, you wanted to fix the housing problem by introducing rent control and realize that it doesn't work at all, you should be willing to do a 180-degree turn on the ideological spectrum and instead remove existing rules, e.g. on the height of a building. 

### Agency to the people?

The reason that there is a question mark in the section title is that I hold two beliefs that seem contradictory at first sight but aren't in my opinion. Firstly, I believe that people make a lot of dumb and irrational decisions, e.g. they drink alcohol, smoke, take drugs, etc. But secondly, I believe that many things that are currently illegal should be legal and thus it is easier for people to make decisions about them. 

This thinking applies broadly to two scenarios. The first are grey areas such as drugs, alcohol, cigarettes, porn or sex work. My approach for those would be to legalize or at least decriminalize all of them and impose takes or nudges in some cases. The specific reasons vary from case to case, e.g. I just don't see any strong reasons for the illegality of sex work (listen to <a href='https://neoliberalproject.org/neoliberal-podcast'>Sex Workers and the State ft. Cathy Reisenwitz</a> on the neoliberal podcast) but I think that smoking is just always a pretty bad deal. The overarching reasons for why I think they should be legal are
1. For all of the grey areas above there is a large demand and there is the possibility to supply the good or service even when it's illegal - you will always find someone who supplies you with some drugs, etc. Thus, the fact that it is illegal will not prevent most consumers but rather just make it more difficult for them to consume it savely. So if the drug addict gets a bad product there is no way to sue the dealer or spread information to other consumers and if the prostitute gets beaten up or a customer isn't willing to pay they are unable to sue them or take any other action. 
2. A legal but regulated good provides more agency to the consumer even if it, at surface level, opens up a choice of making dumb decisions. 

The second scenario is about research and consent. 

Legalize it, regulate it, nudge it. 

Nudging means more agency. 

Drugs, Cigarettes, Alcohol, Porn, Sex work

### Redistribution

Sweden did it correctly. Low business tax, high individual tax. 

### Climate Change 

Certificates

### Monopolies work less often than I thought

There are lots of situations in which people fear a monopoly within a certain market and some companies business model rely entirely on achieving a monopoly. My best explanation for Ubers business model, for example, is a three-step process: a) Achieve market dominance (i.e. a monopoly) b) build self-driving cars c) raise prices and profit. Netflix also seems to prioritize market dominance over short-term profitability and many other platform driven companies try to do the same. Most of them burn a lot of money now in the hopes of achieving a monopoly and becoming a cashcow in the future. However, I'm not so sure whether these strategies pay off. You can only milk your cashcow if people keep using your platform and decide against changing the product and I think some of these companies overestimate the cost of changing for most individuals. Just because I am used to using the Uber-app does not mean I am not willing to download Lyft as soon as Uber raises their prices. Similarly, if Netflix is too expensive I don't see any reason not to just switch to Amazon, Disney or other online-streaming platforms. Clearly, there are examples where the cost of switching is higher because some of the products you have interact well with each other, i.e. having an Apple IPhone and Mac or when all of your friends use a certain social network like facebook it is unreasonable for you, as an individual, to switch. But even in these domains there were very strong market shifts in the past. Remember Blackberry and MySpace? They had nearly complete market dominance and go completely crushed by the competition after some bad management decisions. An even stronger example is inter-city transport in Germany. Some people always feared that the "Deutsche Bahn" a partly private and partly public train company had a monopoly on inter-city transport and therefore could make too much money from their train connections. However, a bus company, Flixbus, provided way cheaper means of transportation between cities and thereby provided good competition for Deutsche Bahn. Interestingly, the strategy of Flixbus was/is to get a monopoly on European road transportation and drive their competition out of business. However, the switching cost for downloading a different app and using a bus that has is painted in a different color and run by a different company don't seem very high. I therefore expect that the competition within this business will still be possible even if Flixbus has market dominance. I guess my best conclusion from these observations is that people are likely to switch even if there are some cost attached to it as long as the difference in quality is felt through higher prices or worse quality. The domains in which you have monopolies that are very hard to break are those outlined above: Water, sanitation and infrastructure. The switching cost are not only high but usually there just is no competition because it doesn't make sense to build a water pipe next to an already existing pipe. One thing that I find quite funny is that most of the efforts to achieve market dominance and milk a monopoly cashcow actually lead to effects that are opposite to what the investors desire. They burn lots of money and hope that they can then reap the benefits later. If the monopoly is never achieved, they essentially redistributed their money to the masses by providing undervalued services. In the end they are the cashcow that we were milking all along. 

### Should CEOs salary be capped?



### Some things I am unsure about

Health care private or public and to which extend?

## Conclusion



#### ***One last note***

If you want to get informed about new posts you can <a href='http://www.mariushobbhahn.com/subscribe/'>subscribe to my mailing list</a> or <a href='https://twitter.com/MariusHobbhahn'>follow me on Twitter</a>.

If you have any feedback regarding anything (i.e. layout or opinions) please tell me in a constructive manner via your preferred means of communication.


