---
layout:     post
title:      "Hire me"
subtitle:   "This is what you should know if you want to hire me"
date:       2021-10-22 20:28:00
author:     "Marius Hobbhahn"
header-img: "img/header-imgs/TODO.png"
category:   opinion
tags:       [Miscellanious]
---

## **What is this post about?**

There are many uncertainties in hiring and things like personality are hard to assess in interviews and tasks. Thus, I want to lay out some of my core beliefs, strength and weaknesses so you know what you're getting into.

## Whatever is most effective

I'm very committed to effective altruism, i.e. I want to do whatever is most effective in improving the world. Thus, the most important criterion for a job is that it is the or one of the most effective options feasible for me. On the one hand, this means that a potential future employer has to convince me that their company is working on an important problem using an effective strategy. Currently, I think AI safety/alignment is most important but I'm willing to change my mind when presented with good arguments. 

On the other hand, this means that I'm willing to do a lot once I am convinced that the job actually is very effective. For example, I'd be willing to relocate everywhere, I'd be willing to pick up whatever skills are necessary and I'd be willing to put most of my time and effort into the job. Furthermore, I'd be willing to take high personal risks such as founding a start-up if that seems like the best option at the time. 

Of course, there are trade-offs between salary, personal goals, location, etc. but you can assume that I'm willing to take cuts as long as I'm convinced that I'm doing what's most effective. 

If you were my current employer and another company offered me a job that is potentially more effective, I'd approach you and discuss possible steps. 
I wouldn't just switch from one day to the next, if that implies damage to the company, e.g. because a project can't be finished. In general, I think most of the time a mutual agreement can be found and I'm interested in reaching it. 

## Direct and honest communication

I really value direct and honest communication. I don't have a problem with negative feedback as long as it is honest and constructive, e.g. "you're code is suboptimal, you should talk to X or read Y" is appreciated. This also holds for soft skills, e.g. "I think you straw-manned me during our last discussion and here is why". In general, you should assume that I want to improve and adapt and am happy to be offered strategies to do so. This also holds for tough calls, e.g. if you think I'm not good enough for the job, I'd like you to tell me.

This also swings the other way though. If the group has a culture that doesn't allow for well-intentioned constructive criticism, I'll be very unhappy. When I realise that people talk behind my back about things they could have easily told me, that makes me very sad. This hasn't happened often but the few times it did, it felt bad because they apparantly didn't think I was approachable enough to just tell me. 

In general, I value rapid feedback cycles. Thus, I 

## Discussing work

Hirarchies don't need to be flat, just reasonable.

## Teamwork

adaptive feedback cycles. 

## Motivation

I'm motivated by doing things I find relevant. 

## Salary

I just want to be able not to think about money. 

#### ***One last note***

If you want to get informed about new posts you can <a href='https://twitter.com/MariusHobbhahn'>follow me on Twitter</a>.

If you have any feedback regarding anything (i.e. layout or opinions) please tell me in a constructive manner via your preferred means of communication.
